[Music]
eminem ak8 slim shape AKA Marshall who's
Madison third
he is a survival rap star father actor
felon media mogul the voice of a
generation
he is immerses raps most controversial
performance storyteller an artist whose
provocative imagery and dark rhymes have
resonated with America's increasingly
disenfranchised youth and it was
multiple personas have enchanted and
hypnotized audiences worldwide born into
a broken home he is drawn deeply from
the well of his own life which provides
the fuel for vision and artistic will
his lyrics are his life his legend his
alter ego and his therapy to understand
his music we must first understand his
life in a world he grew up in I was born
in Highland Kansas and my mother left my
father when I was probably about nine
months old and brought me to st. Joseph
Missouri and left me with my abusive
alcoholic grandmother st. Joseph's
Missouri is a quiet working-class town
it is a town Marshalls grandmother Betty
grew up in a town his mother Debbie grew
up in a place tarnished with the effects
of alcoholism abuse and instability
the challenges in Marshalls family life
will be set in motion long before his
birth the residual effects of
generations of abuse was passed on by
his great-grandmother
even as she lay dying she died a hell of
a death at 93 and I was so glad and she
called for me on her deathbed and I told
her I said you know I'm glad you're
dying she says can you forgive me and I
says no I can't forgive you the way you
beaten induced a little child a little
child innocent child I said you know
you're going to hell don't you and she
looked up at me and I said god help you
despite the years of abuse Betty dreamt
of a better life well as a young girl I
want to just be a mother I want a great
big family you know I was going to have
this house with a white picket fence
like everybody has women and I was just
gonna feel good to my children
bake for me you know just love them to
death that when everything went wrong
should I married mr. Nelson I was 14
soon after young maverick Betty gave
birth to the first of several children
Debbie Marshalls mother Oh Danny was so
tiny I was embarrassed I've being so
young I had a hard labor and my daughter
weighed probably about 4 pounds if you
were to do a drawing of the Mathers
Nelson family relations are like we look
like cats in a bag this is a clan
it's hardscrabble country folk who are
close to each other except when they're
fighting each other she could not wait
to have a baby brother not long after a
baby brother Rob Betty realized Debbie
was unwilling to share the attention of
her mother put him down for a nap one
time so I walked into the bedroom and
she's got her father's ranch big wrench
just about to hit him in the head I had
to watch Debbie from then on
continuously Betty's marriage ended and
the children had a succession of
would-be stepfathers I cannot remember a
time ever when there was not a man in
the house ever really get close to my
stuff days they were pretty much
alcoholics
there was a lot of drama you know
growing up in our family there was a lot
of police called I was sexually
assaulted by my one stepdad when I was
12 he didn't get the job complete
because he was arrested I remember my
mother coming home and the police taking
him out and her telling me he's got her
hope I can get him on to Joe I don't
believe you
I ran away it's like I'm not facing him
if you get him on a job I'm not telling
him I'm sorry because I'm not sorry
because of something he does she want to
get out of house so bad Debbie Debbie
just was tired
Debbie searched for a way out one day
she thought she finally found it and a
quiet boy who lived on a block and
played in a local band Marshall rules
Matt is the second nut Bruce and he was
my knight in shining armor 19 when I was
14 Debbie comes in from school about
Jesus Bruce and our hidden Mary teller
Bruce yeah he says I love Debbie and
Debbie loves me and we're getting
married Debbie and Marshall Bruce
matters the second were married in 1970
am average Debbie hope would take her
away from the troubles of home it wasn't
that I didn't want to be around my
brothers and sisters anymore it's just I
wanted my own life of one of my own
child and I wanted to get away from all
that and next thing I know she finally
got pregnant I was pregnant with Ronnie
when she got pregnant on October 17th
1972 Debbie gave birth to Marshall Bruce
Mathers the third I mean it's like this
such a nail you know it's gonna have
everything he's not gonna want for
anything he's gonna be so sheltered soul
also protected gonna be the best mother
in the world and I made a promise with
God alcohol the drugs the drinking the
pot any of that stuff they would never
go through that the fighting none of it
finally happy with our own family Debbie
left for North Dakota but Bruce would
take over his father's job in a hotel
the couple made their home in the
basement of Bruce's parents house Debbie
said things begin to get bad she'd go
down to coffee shop or the hotel and
Bruce would be playing around the girls
naturally she
you tell her take the kid and go home
she have a lot of lonely time on her
hands and then he begun to beat the heck
out her martial Bruce Mathers ii was a
knife thrower he threw knives he used to
always like to see how close he'd get to
your foot without hitting it and i
remember her calling me and think that
she's coming home she left on a train
when he was maybe 1 or 2 years old just
she says he took the clothes he was
wearing they got a train they headed for
Saint Joe and I think that was sort of
the beginning of what was going to be
many many moves throughout his life
Debbie running again from abuse and the
effects of alcoholism left Bruce and
returned home the st. Joseph with
Marshall his dad never wanted anything
to do with him Marshall tried to contact
him Debbie tried to contact him he went
to California never was seen again Bruce
Mathers then disappeared from his son's
life forever like Betty his grandmother
and Debbie his mother Marshall now was
caught in the same cycle of parental
abandonment Marshall would never know
his father but he would never forget
[Music]
when we first left his dad and moved
back to Missouri I learned a 1-room
efficiency apartment Debbie tried to
make ends meet bouncing from job to job
and house to house always trying to make
a better life for a child not realizing
the effects such constant change would
have on him Debbie and Marshall moved
back and forth from st. Joseph Missouri
to the Detroit area as many as 20 times
in his childhood he did move around a
lot but it was always to better herself
because I could not stay with my Brooke
loader at all I mean we were there a
couple of days and I was like an
eternity and every time it would be like
a dream in a house it's all it right out
from under me Debbie may have tried her
best and most parents do trying your
best though doesn't mean that that's
exactly what your child needs soon
Debbie and her mother began a class on
how to raise Marshall I don't think he
was an angry child I think he would just
got his feelings hurt a lot and I think
his mother controlled him a lot he was a
very big mama's boy Marshall is a loner
he did not really want to get out to
play with other kids had to kind of coax
him he wanted to be with mommy all the
time he never could speak up for himself
but he just go pout and go color his
color books you know or go get on his
beanbag and just watch TV kind like a
little puppy in a corner you know just
go back to my corner
he had a disruption in attachment early
on in that his father left him there
people like his uncle Todd who may be
the closest to a consistent father
figure you know I was a protector you
know and I was taking fish in our
attention try to teach him what a man
was supposed to be I'd get on him about
homosexuality and make sure he knew that
you know boys go with girls and you know
vice versa and you know things like that
they moved around a lot so he didn't
have a lot of stability so those are
some of the early things that may have
begun to make him think is the world a
trustworthy place is it okay
in the middle of the chaos young Marsha
began to find expression in music Marsha
was surrounded 24/7 with music why he
was in my stomach I was saved at home
you know and take the speakers and put
all through the house rooms we just
always said it's a while and just be
like he'd hung himself and just bounce
back and forth constantly bounced off
the back seat of the car the couch
there's music playing he did this
teachers had told me this kid has
retarded
you know he's bouncing his bouncing he
has to sit still he's like this all the
time he's real hyper and you have to
have him on Ritalin and he'd keep going
like this and keep going like this he
bounced off the back seat the first
eight years of his life rocked to the
music growing old Oh Marsha will find
escape in a fantastical world of
superheroes and comic books I was
wanting to act out cartoon characters
and so I wouldn't want him you could
open the door in his room you have
Castle Grayskull going okay he'd have
his cartoons on he'd have a whatever he
wanted but he he entertained himself a
lot he was all he had for years he liked
it that way I mean now he played with
friends but he liked you know
entertaining him stuff and creating his
own little world
he was an to Batman and he was Batman so
everywhere we went with them he had to
wear that outfit yeah most kids they'll
go yeah Batman and jump off of something
big yep the lines down he never moves
down a lot of times kids when they feel
like their external world is
impoverished or they feel neglected they
need to feel big and powerful and strong
and they can feel big and powerful
sturdy and strong by associating with
x-man by associating with Batman and
Superman because they have superpowers
then so it really helps them feel like
okay maybe I'm not some small maybe I'm
not being as abused as much maybe the
world can be okay because I can be
he-man
Marshalls blossoming artistic abilities
provided a quiet retreat from the chaos
of his surroundings
Marshall loved to draw and get into a
lot of arguments and squabbles with
teachers saying he did not draw this
free handed so I would say to them okay
well what's having drop something's it's
an island drop climb what you'd like in
the draw because he could draw anything
Debbie and Marshall continued to move
with Marshall changing schools as often
as every two or three months he was
always the new kid and if he did return
to someplace he'd been before he was
usually behind and so those kids didn't
know him from before so he's always
starting over somewhere he talks a lot
about about this nomadic upbringing in
his music this sort of peripatetic life
were you jumping from one place to the
other
[Music]
Ronnie Betty's son
Debbie's brother was only two months
older than Marshall while Betty and
Debbie classes on how to raise them the
two boys will continually bond their
little carrier sit side by side and they
make their little baby talk Goo's you
know and it was a bombing already there
it went over together you should have
seen him I mean you couldn't really tell
it to apart and they both had the same
color hair got same height and when they
talk they sound just about the same I
encouraged him to to laugh and dance and
be happy the two of them are quite a
team did not want my mother around
Marshall earnest that was just me I had
to be there
Marshall had been told so many lies I
didn't trust her on time and the
dysfunction the yelling the screaming
the fighting they drinking that I
stepdads could've been doing I didn't
want him subjected to it didn't get too
much time together as I started getting
older Debbie we kept pulling Marshall to
Michigan and Ronnie to Missouri as
Marshall approached the end of his grade
school years Debbie and Marshall was
settled permanently in a Detroit area a
city still reeling from the race riots
and major destruction only a few years
earlier
[Music]
there were a lot of tensions at that
time a lot of racial tension the city
was in such chaos that the National
Guard was mobilized in the streets of
Detroit a racial war zone have been
created by the 67 riots marshal will
find himself in the middle of all of it
they always lived in neighborhoods
barely a step above the ghetto and in
Detroit
Marshall consistently found himself one
of the few white kids and predominantly
black schools the neighborhood Eminem
grew up in is particularly interesting
because there still houses there and
people still live in them but they're
just across the street from the suburbs
what you end up with there is a
neighborhood where people have sort of
filled in the gaps it's almost like
hermit crabs you know they found a shell
that suited them they could afford they
moved in there and they finally became
homeowners and just across the street
not too far away from there the people
who moved out who feel like they didn't
move out they didn't make it choice to
me what they were driven out and so
there's a lot of bitterness and there's
a lot of tension that that 8 mile
divided as an annual at door elementary
in Roseville Michigan Marshall was
bullied for months by an older student
named D'Angelo Bailey these beatings
came to a head in January 1982 when
Bailey cornered Marshall in a restaurant
and floored him with a snowball pack
with a heavy object no one reported him
missing from class and he was found
unconscious and bleeding hours later it
was a nightmare when my son did not come
out of a school in the school tonight it
they do that they denied anything about
my baby laying in a pool of blood in the
bathroom and I found him laying there
and running out to my van with him with
you know the teachers and principals you
know well we had a skeletal crew we
didn't notice him missing
no one knew how long he'd been there my
main concern was to getting you know
medical treatment and because he was
like when I found my son he was in the
floor and he was having a seizure
the attack left Marshall in a coma for
ten days I want to beg God to spare my
son it was an only child and told him if
there was anything ever I did wrong in
my life to take me not my child they
told me they give up on my son four
doctors are four and four days
twenty-one doctors
once awake from the coma Marshalls
recovery would be long
having to relearn all his basic motor
functions
he also suffer from headaches loss of
vision and hammering nightmares and
nausea my medical bills were in excess
of over 150,000 I had to quit my job to
take care of him
and I mean it just it was overwhelming
anytime you have any kind of head injury
it can be life-changing
so when you have an injury to the brain
the effects can be really long-lasting I
had a patient many years ago who had a
head injury was meek and mild before
turned very angry and aggressive
afterwards took a year from Marshall
Thomas yeah it has worked with him every
day teaching him how to tie his shoes he
had become almost like an infant like
the medications they had in mind of a
king and a Latin mall presser I did not
when I give him the medication I seen a
zombie and I did not want him zombie
doll I didn't believe in it so the
medication was going to go
[Music]
it comes from my grandmother's side
she wrapped all her life she called it
rhyming and she said when she was a
little girl in Alabama growing up she
remembers her mama work in the fields
cotton fields
you know whites work right alongside of
blacks and cotton fields and they used
to rhyme songs and make up things as
they went to pass the time
Marshalls father was in a band and then
when we went back to Lowell Stern he was
in a band somewhat at the Stateline club
and then I was gonna be Emily back to
Missouri which was called it was running
the satellites in Daddy Warbucks which I
had sung a little bit of backup I played
guitar play piano I write Marshall hey
any love music um his first concert was
a talking hug Ronnie play drums and
Marshall tried his hand at drums -
Ronnie was artistic but not near like my
grandson Marshall Ronnie was always I
mean would even little I got him a toy
drums and little boombox to call him and
he'd turned up full blast and boy he
just danced all the time Eminem's uncle
Ronnie who was about the same age as
Eminem is given a lot of credit for for
sort of infecting him with the rat bug
in 1981
Ronnie played a song for Marshall that
would change his life it was reckless a
song featuring ice-t from the soundtrack
to the movie breaking it was the first
rap song Marshall heard he took the tape
from his uncle Ronnie and played it over
and over and over
he's dancing along and we had me hold a
sign up but he made a great big card
worth sign around my neck and some
breakdancing 25 cents to watch and I
mean this kid could spill in a touch for
hours looks like I can remember I'm
sitting in his room for hours basically
heats up there and play the same beats
over and over and over and right he
would wake me up like at 3 o'clock my
mom is this award does this rhyme music
just please help me find it
so we did the dictionary out yes that's
a word you know and
what's the definition of it and how my
brother Ronnie would do stupid tapes
together and
you know like they were performing in
front of people so when you got into
music it was like his natural sense of
rhythm came right into his play with his
stuff the two of them I can just see
them here becoming Ronnie with a figure
from this side and Marshall from this
side meeting in the front they were
gonna be big fingers and rappers the two
of them never going to go far away and
they were going to be in movie pictures
with the rapping and singing I mean I
can just I just see them and sometimes I
salmon you know it's wonderful other
times I break down and cry
Marshalls ice-t influence would need to
stay strong to pull him through some
serious life changes the latest in the
line of foster kids Debbie Mathers had
taken in Kimberly Scott into Marshalls
life in 1988 she was just 13 I was on
call for the state of Michigan every
weekend the kids were dropped off at the
well pretty part went to pick up
Marshall is very jealous of the kids he
uh we would sit in a circle and talk if
anybody had a problem here to discuss it
and he'd jump up and run off because
you'd be like well you like them more
than me and it's like now come here
they'd have to go after everything but
he was he was a it was like I want mom
to myself or not at all
Kim stepfather didn't want her mama said
Shanna go so Kim was staying anywhere
she could and I remember going to
Mission and I said well you got here Oh
mom now don't fan her
I've got a daughter now Debbie never had
any little girls she took her home
cleaned you up and was so happy to have
a girl Kim some settle into the mathers
household with Debbie doting on every
move Kim was very spoiled too because
they always wanted a daughter
it was tough trying to juggle everything
around I try to just come as much as
there was as much as Marshall or anybody
else
she was very insecure and she'd been
through a lot when she was younger
did not know no father Jim was real
tight-lipped didn't have much to say Kim
became jealous whenever Debbie would be
on the couch
Kim would have to crawl in between you
they fought like brother and sisters
you'd never believe that they was ever
going to become enemy you know get
together when you went up to Marshalls
room get the whole upstairs to himself
they were always you knowing rusting
together Hey I thought Marshall wasn't
doing too bad in the beginning you know
she's kind of cute Oh Debbie said one
day she came home and they were playing
around so she ordered Kim out and
Marshall said I'm going to so they left
they walked down on Debbie and Debbie
couldn't stand it and then they're like
we're boyfriend and girlfriend now and
you know Kevin told me haha the time we
were and you just didn't even know it
but I don't believe that she helped him
in the beginning establish this manhood
and know who he was and Debbie was she
also is a relationship she tried to
break him up a lot of times and it
worked
they would fight then when the minute
they got in a fight Debbie would add
fuels that flame she saw a lot of
problems when I got it way out of hand
oh no Debbie didn't want that but you
know she wanted just enough to keep him
away so she had Marshall all to herself
he got kicked out of his mom's he came
and started sleeping at our house
couchsurfing when he first moved in his
mom had this big green boat he could
hear it like coming halfway down the
street and he'd be like wreck wreck
wreck if my mom comes up to the door I
don't live here why don't you want to
talk to your mom your mom she screwed up
Baba she'd come driving by real slow
he'd be up in the visor peeking out
looking out like like what is she doing
and she come up to the doors Marshall no
Marshall
Byron Williams is Eminem's former
bodyguard and friend Kim is his mother
reincarnated that's his mother all over
again
the middle of Busey took with her all
they're getting she would hit him I
watch her take her heels off and beat
the kid ahead with her shoes I mean and
he didn't want to hit her back so he
punches tire or punch me
she has the potential to be a nice
person man I just haven't seen that side
of her yet you know but she shoved me
twice every day if they didn't fight it
wasn't normal you know it was like they
constantly were at each other's back
a lot of time she was very moody you
know what let him do a lot of things and
stuff and like I said she whenever he'd
have something big going on she'd screw
it up they were probably like I don't
know dr. Jekyll meets mr. Hyde
relationship you know it could turn
quick and they could right out she's
also sort of like home for him she knew
him when nobody else did when he was
suffering when he was trying to try to
climb when he was just not sure that it
was worth it I'm in my room getting
ready to go to bed and Kim comes over I
hear him out in the kitchen and they're
yelling at each other and all of a
sudden I hear chairs moving on the floor
and sounds like they're going at it and
I'm like thinking to myself oh my god
what's going on you know so I jump out
of my room and she's just beating on him
he's not swinging you know I'm just like
in total shock oh my god you know she's
picking them up living a life with
repeated violence and abuse Marshall
will continue to be tested
[Music]
few months before that summer and my
little brother looked at me and said
stuff look what I have and I'm thinking
well this is nice because he opens the
closet and shows me all these quotes and
he turns to me and says this is material
you know what I'm missing and I said
what honey said love I have no love
there's no love here on December 14th
1991 Ronnie poke and horn killed himself
with a gunshot to the head
Ronnie was despondent over a breakup
with a girlfriend distraught over
Ronnie's death Marshall did not attend
his funeral
Betty videotaped her son's funeral and
mailed a copy to marshal the bit of you
between Betty and her daughter still
confuses what the possible intention of
the tape may have been it really been
bitter about that it just starts the
organ music and it's the you know a
bitter area and they say I'm and it just
shows him in the casket there because it
was open casket you know all the flowers
and all I thought you've never been to
recenter you need to deal with it you
know this is reality but he said I tried
to kill him when he got the tape and the
pictures he collapses I was not trying
to hurt him when I was told she's on the
video I really don't think that he
really thought too much of it because he
can serve as a source
my daughter lied to him and she said
Ronnie would be alive today but you
didn't you weren't home to take a phone
call that Ronnie called and asked to
speak to Marshall and she said Marshall
wasn't home Marshall needs to know
Ronnie did not call him and the guilt
that was put on Marshall
thank you my god is my fault with the
loss of his uncle
partner Marshall would now be left alone
the struggle
[Music]
a bad performance in school would make
his chances for success even tougher he
flunked the ninth grade three times
Debbie was you know Marcia what are you
gonna do what are you gonna do for a
living if she was really concerned for
him because he had no one she was scared
for the kids future undeterred by his
mother's concerns Marshall will begin
focusing intently on his and Ronnie's
dream and develop his skills as a rap
artist at the time rap lyrics proclaimed
an anti Authority message of racial
politics and the realities of life in
the ghetto early rap artists such as
Public Enemy ice-t and NWA
were beginning to influence and inspire
Marshall and his crew Eminem had decided
that he wanted to be a rapper but as a
white rapper he really had no role model
there was really nobody else out there
Marshall began making tapes in the
basement of his mother's house with
Deshawn Holton a Lincoln High School
classmate who called himself poof
probably 18 17 or 18 very very very
polite mr. Mathers do you need me to do
anything for you or anybody say please
and thank you or the other kids were
just like get me this or do that or no
I'm not taking out the garbage G words
using the basement all the time to
practice and scratch records but I found
out they were my albums okay that they
used to scratch Marshall and proof would
come out of the basement with a tape
they persistently shop to local record
stores including record time run by
Harvey Bunner mmm and his crew that he
hung out with they were the basement
production crew all his cats that he
used to hang out with and they come in
and they buy all the new hip-hop that
come out it didn't matter who it was if
it was something new and cool especially
out of New York they bought it
so all this stuff's coming in and
they're buying all this stuff and
everything but anytime anybody locally
come out they hated them
especially Marshall Marshalls like these
guys suck these guys don't have no
talent ICP who are they they suck then
he started getting down
kid rock and stuff and I happen to have
a shirt on that dangers like you like
Kid Rock and everything I'm like yeah I
like Kid Rock I support local hip-hop
and he's like well he sucks I go you're
telling me all these bands that suck but
I haven't heard a damn thing come out of
your mouth yet he didn't really make a
name for himself until I was a kid rock
in store that we had he had just
released his album on jive records and
he just started getting a buzz so
there's all these kids are coming in for
Kid Rock stop and all of a sudden here
comes this little skinny little kid with
blue eyes I'll challenge you to a rap
right now yo you want a battle yo yo yo
kind of in Kid Rock's face everybody's
like well who is this asshole oh it's
just that Marshall there's an Eminem guy
that he calls himself he's just thought
whatever happened he thinks he's going
somewhere and all oh you know every
other words that this after that
everybody was looking around like who is
this kid because he's coming in the
store he bugging Kid Rock you know you
want a battle is like Kid Rock don't
battle you know Kid Rock's like you know
got his own thing going on it was really
cool about it he said listen he goes
today is my day your day may come he
goes but this is my in store right now
I've heard some of your stuff and you go
way too fast you need to enunciate when
you enunciate people understand you then
maybe you can have an in-store like me
so then he became Eminem and that was
really when he began to market himself
what him you know he learned the art of
business he learned the art of
networking as well as working on his
craft and getting better and better and
and in doing that he was able to meet
people and get people to listen to him
that maybe were outside of his normal
circle of Detroit which helped him get
discovered
Eminem began to hone his craft in
earnest attending open mikes and
freestyle showcases around Detroit
however the greatest test of his young
life was soon arrived Jim got pregnant
he came in and he was like wow man I
just found out that Kim's pregnant and
I'm gonna be a dad you know and how am I
gonna get a house
I got this job barely pays enough hailey
Jade Scott was born Christmas Day
December 25th 1995 I know I think he was
born and everything just seemed like it
went huh can I water the baby was used
as a weapon against Marshall but instead
of following the actions of his father
and grandfather
Haley's birth brought a new sense of
focus and determination to Eminem he was
going to succeed his family had failed
Marshall loved his daughter he stuck
with her plate and I mean if he did take
care of this imminent view fatherhood as
a blessing he threw himself into
providing for his family while polishing
his rap skills
[Music]
Gilbert's Lodge is a down-home Roadhouse
outside of st. Clair Shores Marshall
worked at Gilbert's on and off for three
years Gilbert's Lodge was probably
Eminem's mainstay for a while I mean
that was his steady gig when when the
tapes weren't selling when people
weren't coming to his gigs he could
always count on going back to Gilbert's
Lodge and flipping burgers and from what
I'm told he was a pretty good
short-order cook he would quit there go
to a new job for like two weeks and then
go back to Gilbert's
and put again do another job and then go
back to Gilbert working double shifts
for minimum wage Gilbert's became more
home van home when Marshall first
started working at Gilbert's he sware
those really baggy baggy pants I'm
looking at him going man pull those
pants up buddy how can you work and not
trip over them whenever he worked is
constantly rap and rap and honing your
skills when he would get a food order
for example he'd started rhyme based on
what the food order was you know he
would bring in tapes for people and say
listen this where you think about this
he'd try and get people who come out to
his performances and a lot of the people
did go I mean they didn't like rap they
might be in a rough Club somewhere in
Detroit they wouldn't have gone to
otherwise but they liked him and so they
would go to show the support very very
steely focused that's one thing I
noticed about him yeah he was very
intent you could see in his eyes
everything would just come off the tops
of their heads and I just sit there in
amazement but yet I'd be going okay
where's my cheese balls let's go okay I
got people waiting for their food and
they're just going on and on and on you
know and it they did wonderful is it was
quite entertaining when he wasn't
working at Gilbert's Lodge he was
working on his career Marshall would
usually write either on the little
notebook on the back of a ticket and
whatever he could write on he would
write on if it was his hand or he'd
always be writing something down he
wants his own
[Music]
I can't even explain and when he was on
his own he would be completely sober man
he put his little headphones on and he
would take his finger like this he will
actually write the rhymes in his hair
and writing him out in the air and he
would have like most people have like
one notepad but do you have like five
six different pieces of paper it's
almost like he sees the world in a Hall
of Mirrors
and he takes those distorted images and
he puts him in his music there was no
school of hip-hop to where you could
walk in and they you know you got to do
it like this
he would take whole page front and back
with the small writing I mean you do
have to get a magnifying glass to
actually see what he was writing because
he'd write so small you write all these
words and like three columns and it
would go down all these words were wine
and all the words that didn't completely
rhyme with them but he could make them
ROM he would write them in the next
column and he would go in and pick each
one of these words and like match him up
it's like decoding it he'd sit down at
the table with a track that he liked
he'd play it through and rewind really
can keep right and keep right and you're
going to booth
and he'll sit there and he'll write and
you'll listen to it and you have the
sounds just blaring it's pretty much
like the same sample over and over and
over until he get it completely written
he's going around the hip-hop shops all
these other places he's getting into
these battles downtown I walk out of the
step off the steps of st. Andrews and
it's an alleyway in between st. Andrews
and this other club and it was a big
circle out there I'm like oh man they've
got to fight and then I'm like I'll get
closer to the circle might know they got
a battle going on you know
to establish his reputation as a rapper
Eminem began participating in rap
battles at various Detroit hip-hop clubs
[Music]
st. Andrews Hall is a converted Church
and a popular hip-hop club in downtown
Detroit the basement is called the
shelter one of the most important
proving grounds in the city being in the
shelter is like being in the basement of
your mom's house and you having a big
block party everybody that comes in
knows everybody music is pumping and the
MCS up there rapping and everybody is
attentive to what they're saying hanging
on every word that they said Eminem
would now have to bear out his talents
in front of all black audiences like the
song lose yourself from the 8 mile
soundtrack the stage is st. Andrews gave
Eminem its first shot even when M will
go up there you always have the people
who just like didn't get into him you
still had that other people that really
got into him he really had no role model
there was really nobody else out there
and in Detroit at the time there was a
place called hip hop shop Saturdays at
the hip hop shop I think they started
around 12:00 noon and proof would
usually host and DJ head would usually
spin the records I mean it was pretty
much based on the audience ruling who
who got burned the hardest and who was
most triumphant the rap battles were
that were deep you know you might dig
into somebody's personal lives but you
know it was whoever could put their
lyrics to the other the best you know
and week after week you could tell when
somebody went home and they would
practice in and they lived and breathe
it that's to think about you know going
to the rap battles the guys that were
rapping were just some guys who decided
yesterday that they want to rap and they
decided they were gonna write some stuff
know these guys lived and breathed
hip-hop but Eminem's early battles were
hard for it and never easily won you
just come up start rhyming and was done
and leave the stage people are like yeah
he's really good he was putting like a
hundred and ten percent and of
everything with any rap battle
anywhere he could be noticed he was
dedicated he was trying to make it he
was trying to explain the Kim look you
know this could be our big break let me
do it she was always had a word and
about him doing it why are you doing
this you need to go out and buy your
debt you know your daughter diapers
teaming up with proof and local Detroit
produces Jeff and Mark Bass Eminem made
his first record and two song EP called
backstabber
backstabber which was inspired by this
fight that he had with Kim his
girlfriend at the time I think that was
the first time he really let rip with
his emotions on recording
he took his tax money and pressed it up
he pressed like 500 to a thousand copies
sock did okay I mean he didn't do
massive amounts of numbers I think he's
sold like 200 of them mark kemp was
Eminem's first manager mark founded
underground sounds magazine a national
hip hop publication based in Detroit
unlike other hip hop magazines at the
time underground sound paid attention to
up-and-coming artists especially if they
were from the same hometown of Detroit
my original meeting with Eminem was a
phone conversation he called asked me
how does he submit his tape he's he
likes a magazine he's interested in
getting some type of coverage in a
magazine sent in a tape I liked it I
reviewed it did hear that there was some
talent here you can just hear it
something's got to happen here it's it's
too good not to happen nothing happened
he said a lot of people took him as a
joke and he went to a lot of reverse
racism and proof kind of gave him pretty
much the ghetto pass when he first put
the tapes out you know people are like
you know not really feeling it you
didn't finish school now you want to rap
you're gonna be a white rap it's not
gonna work
you know everybody from his school from
you know guys in the neighborhood the
nightclubs people laughed at him when he
was in the suburbs the white kids didn't
want to listen to this kid singing black
music then when he was in the city the
black kids didn't want to hear this
white kid playing black music and trying
to perform black music somebody at the
end of the show passing something out
and a guy took it said this is a joke
throws it out and there's this like some
altercation all I saw was this massive
amount of people into this little swarm
and he's in the middle of it settled
everything tempers you know settle down
and stuff that's when I knew that there
was something else behind this guy that
he was very serious about what he wanted
to do and he took offense with what
people said to him here he did all this
work and put all this stuff out and
people were throwing the trash you
weren't even giving it a listen even
through a stormy relationship with Kim
the continual struggles of raising a
daughter and the grind of working a
minimum-wage job
Eminem relentlessly pursued his music
career working once again with Jeff and
Mark II bass the producers who have been
mentoring him since he was 15 Eminem was
able to complete and release his second
recording Infini infinite comes out I
thought it was a really good album all
the way through he was out on cassette
it was out on vinyl
I remember hearing it listening to it
thinking god this guy's really good I
walked into this club to see some groups
I want to see proof Group five Ella I
wasn't expecting Eminem who was like
you've heard the new Eminem stuff I was
like no but this dude over there just
brought me his new new album I was like
I want to meet Eminem
where's Eminem innit he was like that
dude I was like wait a minute the white
dude just brought this up to me
that's Eminem I was floored cuz I got
that tape and a couple others and that
was all I listened to wondered why he
was still rapping in tiny clubs ten
people for local artists getting on the
air of hip-hop radio station WJLB
is a gateway to success in Detroit
beyond DJ Bushman has followed the scene
for years hearing all the potential
hopefuls he was cool with Bushmen but
Bushmen didn't have to say of what went
on the air again there you had to be
black to be on the air and if you
weren't then he didn't get it you got
tossed aside today's hit music 93 1
Eminem made another important radio
connection deejay Lisa Lisa sponsored
open mic nights during her program
Eminem called persistently to audition
Lisa Lisa was impressed with his Drive
and lyrical expertise so she invited him
on he became a station favorite and
wonderful regulus one of the first
couple of wraps he did I'm writing it
was that he was locked in a psycho Ward
or something but it was it was almost
like a joke it was like a comedy but
then you listened to it it had such a
dark undertone when he jumped down the
mic he turned all of that anger that he
felt in the room teasing him into a
strength and he ended up winning I just
remember sitting there watching this
little blond white kid like what are you
doing now are you turning this around on
these guys for me for him being white I
didn't care I would listen to it I
always try to give any feedback to
anybody I could about their music though
the album made people in the Detroit
music scene a way of Eminem's talent and
abilities infinite was a commercial flop
Eminem and the bass brothers got stuck
with the bill he was respected but not
respected I think there was more talk
behind his back he used to come home
discouraged a lot there's days he'd be
like man I just want to give this up I
want to forget it I'm gonna be done with
it I'm gonna just keep working do what I
got to do to get by when he realized he
was gonna have to work for a living
Marshall and my sister would compete
over who had the most pills yeah they
would fight over who had the most not
who had the pills who had the most pills
the black community said no Don he was
sort of the white zebra you're not black
we don't want you here he was out of
place
this point he wanted to die recovering
from the commercial failure of infinite
the rest of Eminem's life was crumbling
beneath him he was fired from Gilbert's
he was constantly fighting with him and
he couldn't support his daughter haily
he was fed up pissed off and at the end
of his rope in a moment of desperation
clinging to the memory of his uncle
Ronnie Eminem tried to kill himself by
swallowing a handful of pills
out of the darkness of M&M suicide
attempt came a renewed inspiration the
fond of voice he would need to succeed
as an artist
[Music]
there's a story that I've been told
where he was talking to Buddha full of
rhymes he was another Detroit rapper and
he was telling him you know I'm just not
getting anywhere with this and so I'm
thinking of trying something different
we were telling them that he needed a
gimmick an image and his identity was
mask because he didn't know who to be he
got fed up his ego totally flip they
don't like the good stuff you know I'm
gonna just start screwing around and
writing some stuff and said hey I'm
gonna start writing the craziest stuff
that you could possibly imagine
he had this alter ego called Slim Shady
and we're just like wow wow he's got a
totally different sound it's great when
he really started getting looked at mark
Kemp
Eminem's first manager arranged for
proof and another Detroit area rapper
named bizarre to attend some meetings
with music executives in New York
bizarre new Aminu from the Detroit rap
scene and invited him to go along
bizarre played his stuff and Eminem
played his stuff and I think bizarre
told me Eminem got a little bit better
response I remember when he called me
and got my feedback on a new record he
was making and he rapped just the two of
us to me blew my mind I was like whoa
Wow and it was the Slim Shady
EP
oh my god this is so good
murder murder you know went up to
Eastland shot a policeman when you hear
Slim Shady rapping if you listen to his
music it's really distinctive which are
the Eminem tracks and which are the Slim
Shady tracks the Slim Shady tracks are
the harder edge they're the more bitter
the more vindictive tracks normally was
he'd been the kid that was being picked
on or Bowie or told he wasn't gonna
match anything that was his dark and
evil side that basically was coming out
I start saying all these things about
different people gay bashing the
homophobic stuff lesbians hotheads doing
drugs anything associated with violence
The Slim Shady EP was released in 1997
when this came out this was no joke I
mean with people putting aside Infinite
and stuff because he sounded like
somebody else when he did this EP there
was Slim Shady was born and it got a
positive response and it allowed him to
take out a lot of his frustrations we're
getting successes we're selling tapes
out of different stores and we were
getting shows and we kept selling I'm
getting him and stuff we knew we had
something here steady sales of The Slim
Shady EP proved that Eminem was ready
for the next level scribble Jam is an
urban arts festival that celebrates the
hip-hop lifestyle the annual summer
event is a convergence of expiring MCS
graffiti artists DJs and b-boys even
with the forward progress of his music
Eminem's family life was still remain in
a state of turmoil I really had to talk
Eminem into it I mean he was like I
broke I was like don't worry about it
I'll cover you you should just make some
time and go down there he had a show the
night before so it was like it was
probably three eight three or four a.m.
before we even got on a road to
Cincinnati Slim Shady competed at
scribble Jam in 1997 it was an
opportunity for his new persona to
showcase his freestyle and battle rap
abilities he had been crafting on the
streets for a broader audience outside
of Detroit
[Music]
there are 80 people that into the MC
battle one of them was having a TMC's he
battled his way to number two he lost to
a guy named juice
I remember him coming back and telling
me that he finished in second place in
Cincinnati where they kind of had it
fixed because the guy from the store won
you know there was a few and everybody's
like oh that white boy one white boy won
and he lost to this guy and he should
have won he was frustrated but he was
excited cuz he knew he should want but
then again finished in second place he
just says well I'm just gonna do it one
step more and no matter where he did or
where he worked or whatever he always
told everybody he was gonna be a star
you just watch while the second-place
finish a scribble Jam why and Eminem and
slim Shady's reputation beyond the
streets of Detroit there was no
immediate financial benefit Eminem
returned to an empty home Kim and Hayley
following the family cycle left him to
live with relatives in warm Michigan a
suburb of Detroit the new Slim Shady
went back to the old eminem couchsurfing
ways ultimately ending up in a place he
had worked for years to avoid here's a
guy up until the time he made it when he
was in his mid to late 20s he was still
in with his mom even when he had a
girlfriend and a baby at a music
industry conference in Detroit mark Kemp
approached windy day and influential
music industry power broker and gave her
the Slim Shady EP I was like I'm gonna
give you something I really want you to
pay attention to yeah I'll give you this
tape by the sky mm he's a white guy but
he's gonna floor you initially reluctant
Wendy was 1 over Baz masterful handling
of words
rhythm and his Slim Shady pissant she
was putting together an event with a
magazine called rap sheet in LA she was
organizing an event within the event
called rap Olympics and they were the
teams would battle in things such as
storytelling would be one battle or
picking stuff out of a hat she was like
I'm putting together this team I want
Eminem on the team I got Thurston Howell
the third I got juice she wanted him to
finish it off I told him he should do it
I should definitely do it she flew him
out I got a ticket I flew out at the rap
Olympics Eminem again
his second to the same wrapper juice yet
the trip to our lay yielded much more
important results whatever name went out
to LA he was basically someone who had
beaten the local talent who had gotten a
little bit of a regional reputation but
the rap Olympics was a chance for him to
showcase in a major forum LA based radio
station had mmm on the air they really
lit up the airwaves Eminem dropped some
verses that have people's wigs blown
back for real I met a guy from
Interscope I gave him a tape everything
Eminem had worked for the embodiment of
his struggles determination perseverance
and tears for in that tape The Slim
Shady EP and it was finally in the right
hands Wow
Eminem's tape was circulating through
Interscope he made a second appearance
on the same la radio show and not only
did he do well but he caught the ear of
dr. Dre and dr. Dre basically by the
time he went to Detroit was ready to
take him to the world dr. Dre is one of
the most influential producers in rap
music in 1992 he founded Death Row
Records with Suge Knight he also
engineered the careers of Snoop Dogg and
Tupac among others shortly after
listening to the Slim Shady EP dr. Dre
sign Eminem to a record deal with his
label aftermath records after months of
recording The Slim Shady LP was released
by aftermath and Interscope Records
the result was instantaneous when the
first single hit from his first album hi
my name is become a buzz clip song we
had an in-store and there was thousand
people here
he was just signing finally they come
out there and he told him and said look
that's all you can sign you've done
you've been here for three four hours
sign and stuff that's when you found out
this wasn't the guy that comes in and
talks to all the time that's the time
you find out guys going off we may never
see this guy again when Eminem first
started to make it was you could still
see on some of the telephone poles in
town or on some of the some of the walls
near some of the music venues you could
still see scraps of an Eminem poster
most of those posters were put up there
by Eminem himself Eminem's Fame came
like a flash flood
it caught a lot of people by surprise
even Eminem himself The Slim Shady LP
debuted at number 3 on the Billboard
charts and will go on to sell 1 million
copies by the end of that year On June
14th 1999 in the wake of Eminem's
worldwide success as an artist he and
Kim got married but the relationship
remained tumultuous I think with Kim he
always knows where she's coming from he
doesn't always like it but I think
that's someone where he feels like she's
with me for who I am
in July 2000 Kim attempted suicide by
slashing her wrist can recovered though
a month later the couple was separated
they reunited later that year for a few
months but on March 1st 2001 they filed
for divorce weeks later Kim filed a
$10,000,000 defamation lawsuit against
her husband he probably feels that you
know why couldn't I have had a more
traditional upbringing and I can
understand being upset about that but if
he had had a more traditional upbringing
we wouldn't have Eminem today because
that is really the raw fuel for what he
is in September 1999 Debbie Mathers
filed a 10 million dollar lawsuit
against her son for defamation of
character
the lawsuit cited numerous instances and
lyrics and interviews in which Marshall
described his mother as abusive a drug
user and an unfit parent I am who I say
I am he says in his music he talked
about his mom suing everybody one of the
first things I started to do was to
check the courthouses
and lo and behold going back 25 years
she's been suing folks as a response to
Eminem's lyrical criticisms Debbie
recorded a song called set the record
straight
with a group called IDX
the song is available for purchase on
the internet for $3 in 2002 Eminem's
mother settled a 10 million dollar
defamation lawsuit against her son for
only $25,000 after considerable legal
costs Debbie received only $1,600 though
betty has been outspoken about her
daughter's lawsuit against her son she
too was capitalizing on his fame she is
writing a tell-all book about her
daughter's relationship with the rap
star in 2003 Kim was arrested and
charged with possession of over 25 grams
of cocaine ordered to wear an electronic
device she skipped town only to be
recaptured and jailed for testing
positive for cocaine use Marshall fought
for joint custody of his daughter Haley
and won he continues to play a major
part in her life people are on the ins
and outs at times with him you know
depending on and who's feeling cranky
that day he's talking a part of the
family and he's not talking to other
parts and they seem to take turn it's
almost like a revolving door but they're
always still seems to be a fairly strong
connection to the family Eminem has been
the target of other lawsuits for more
unlikely sources D'Angelo barely the
bully who beat Marshall into a coma and
later became the inspiration for the
song brain damage about a 1 million
dollar defamation lawsuit against Eminem
in 2001 barely a Roseville trash
collector claims the Eminem did
permanent damage to his musical career
and calls him anger and embarrassment
the suit was dismissed by Judge Deborah
Savita her written opinion was issued in
a form of a 36 line rap song
cuz eminem used his name in vain mmm
says barely used the dome around beetle
off any judge up is facing the ground
eminem contends that is rappers
protected by the rights guaranteed by
the person fit minutes eminem maintains
that islam is true and that barely used
to beat them black and blue and
alternative e space that the story is
phony and a reasonable person with pink
is baloney the course must always
balance the rights of a defendant in one
place in a false light at the plaintiff
present no question of fact to dismiss
is the only acceptable act if the
language uses anything but pleasing it
must be highly objectionable to a
personal reason even if objectionable to
the truth this is well known and Rinna's
Belleek a substantially blown stories
that no one can take us back an
exaggeration of that the miracle only be
hyperbola in his death for the whole
team in positions that eminem is
entitled to summary disposition one of
the things about the people who knew
eminem when he was just marshall mathers
is that there's a genuine affection for
him you know neighbors chefs waitresses
at Gilbert's lodge at the other places
he hung out people at record stores
people who used to make rhymes and and
record their own rap and their own music
and beats there isn't this feeling that
why him you know I'm as good as he is
people seem to genuinely understand and
recognize that this was a talent far
beyond anything they had when you look
at Marshall Mathers
there's the little kid who's still there
there's a slim shadey who got him to
where he is today
but then there's mm who says you know
what slim
isn't real you know let's let's enjoy
what he does let's use this to get my
demons out but also let's not take it
too seriously because if you do you're
gonna go crazy Eminem is the writer /
rapper Marshall Mathers is the good
father but also the person that was
picked on as a kid that was bullied
Eminem and Marshall Mathers got together
and created Slim Shady
who was the bully the hip hop bullied
the hip hop juggernaut to me he's not
seeing shady he's not him in him he's
that little kid I know Marshall is a
really good person
he's a good father but there is I think
the some shady guy is like the evil the
evil person that you know if it wants to
go out like right all these different
things and say I've been there and done
that and where the other one is trying
to be super daddy and gonna be sweet and
and you know do all these things with
the kids and and it's like almost
sometimes you feel like you're dealing
with a chuckling hi he's a very
complicated boy Eminem has stayed true
to the city and Friends that nurtured
him forming d2l with proof bizarre DJ
craze Mannix and others from his early
days one thing I like about him you know
whenever you talk about hip-hop or you
talk about film yo Lee here in New York
and you hear LA and em still lives here
he keeps things here he shoots videos
here and he had the 8-mile DVD release
party here which was great
Eminem did two concerts in North America
this year and both of them were in
Detroit if you want to come see me you
got to come to Detroit might be the only
reason in your whole life you've ever
said I got to come to Detroit but if you
want to see Eminem you got to come to my
hometown two shows sold out
the mayor of Detroit welcomes them back
as a conquering hero even appears in a
video that they showed during the
performance but when you come home and
the people are welcoming you with open
arms and hailing you then
that's it you know that's a gold
standard Detroit was here waiting for
him and I think anytime he comes back he
just has to say when and people are
gonna come running The Slim Shady LP
sold over three million copies the
follow-up the Marshall Mathers LP
released in May 2000 became the fastest
selling rap album in history it was also
the first rap album ever nominated for
the album of the Year Grammy in November
2002 Eminem starred in a box office
smash 8 mile
the title track lose yourself won the
Academy Award for Best Original Song
Eminem aka Slim Shady
aka Marshall Bruce Mathis the third has
no skeletons in his closet instead he
has turned his 12-minute pass into the
world's most lucrative Public therapy
session
out of the ordinary do crazy stuff man I
can call it one time you know a lot of
things that he did wasn't funny right
away when you look back to this guy's
crazy mag one time we were in San
Francisco where he's performing and this
guy was heckling him on stage and he
stops in the middle of the show so he
starts heckling the guy back and him
this guy's going back and forth this
thing I know he jumps off the stage they
hit this guy hit the wrong guy so the
whole everybody in the whole front row
just like mobs Eminem and it just
they're beating him and they're beatin
some serious man so I'm sitting there
looking at this like wow they're gonna
kill him so I jump in I jump in I get
hit then I get hit I hit the guy that
hit me I forget about Eminem the deejay
jumps in the street team jumps and all
these people backstage jump in and we
pull him out of the crowd get him back
on stage now the whole crowds about
3,500 people everybody want to kill us
so I'm trying to get him back I'm trying
to get him back to the tour bus so we're
we're running we're getting everybody to
run back to the tour bus in the tour bus
the tour manager stops and say hey you
gotta finish the show the show must go
on
my men are gonna kill us and you know
that holler you know a few slang a few
slam so he comes back out and he does
just don't give a you know and and
performs that and the crowd just go nuts
man but that next morning man everybody
had black eyes swollen jaws busted noses
you know and he lived for that man I got
a call that next morning from my mom was
like don't you like the little white boy
get you in trouble I said I'm gonna try
to do what I can my how he found out
what she knew about it you know he just
always did crazy stuff man so
unpredictable I think that's why I
wanted to cool the stains of bottom man
when Eminem was just Marshall Mathers he
could barely afford to shop it came up
and now he owns a house that was owned
by the CEO of Kmart
whenever name went out to LA he was
basically someone who had beaten the
local talent who had gotten a little bit
of a regional reputation but the rap
Olympics was a chance for him to
showcase in a major forum and based on
his performance out there he let me let
me say that again what did I say before
about that he did some good shit and Dre
duh get rowdy okay
he came over from Mother's Day she was
so happy with the bouquet of flowers he
bought her for Mother's Day it was the
biggest most beautiful she's I said Devi
that must have cost 200 ours oh my god
no that must be $500
he must cost $600 I mean and she was
taking care of and it was getting all
brittle two weeks after Mother's Day the
arrangement still sitting there Oh be
careful my flowers look how beautiful it
is and Haley made her a picture she
painted you know
happy Mother's Day grandmother and it
was they had a big house on it with a
sunshine and you know typical girl and
it was a beautiful picture it was real
big about like this she still hasn't
took it off the wall though and is
really neat about this long neck jacket
I don't want to look like her I look
like Reba McEntire four years four years
I with her it's one of those things man
you can't wait to see what he's gonna do
next
it's like watching a living soap opera
man